GEP 5 - optional rounding (#324)
iza-institute-of-labor-economics/gettsim: docs/geps/gep-05.rst

ways. This leads to different use cases.

1. Some applications require the exact, rounded, amount as specified in the law. This is
   also helpful for creating test cases.
2. Other applications require smooth functions and the non-rounding error does not
   matter much.

This document describes how we go about supporting both use cases.

Implementation
--------------

GETTSIM allows for optional rounding of functions' results. Rounding parameters are
specified in the ``.yaml``-files.

The example below contains GETTSIM's encoding of the fact that the [XXX] law specifies
that ``grundr_zuschlag_m`` be rounded to the nearest second decimal point.

- The key has to be a function name, in this case ``grundr_zuschlag_m``
- The parameter ``base`` determines the base to which the variables is rounded. It has
  to be a floating point number.
- The parameter ``direction`` has to be one of ``up``, ``down``, or ``nearest``.
- The reference must contain the reference to the law, which specifies the rounding.

The rounding parameters become part of the dictionary ``policy_params`` once
``set_up_policy_environment`` is called in the same way as other policy parameters.

.. code-block:: yaml

>        rounding:

Reviewer: Add which file this is and requirements on structure. At which level is rounding specified, for example.

         grundr_zuschlag_m:
           2020-01-01:
             base: 0.01
             direction: nearest

>              reference: Whatever law

Reviewer: Please use actual example and add the law in the text above, too.

At the definition of the function ``grundr_zuschlag_m`` the decorator
``add_rounding_spec_by_params_file`` indicates that the respective output should be
rounded and in which parameter file the rounding parameters are specified.

.. code-block:: python

       @add_rounding_spec(params_file="ges_renten_vers")
       def grundr_zuschlag_m(
           grundr_zuschlag_vor_eink_anr_m: FloatSeries, anrechenbares_eink_gr_m: FloatSeries
       ) -> FloatSeries:
           ...
           return out

The decorator adds the attribute ``__rounding_parameter_file__`` to the function. When
calling ``compute_taxes_and_transfers`` with ``rounding=True``, GETTSIM loops over all
functions. If a function has a rounding attribute, the rounding is applied based on the
specification in the argument ``policy_params``. In the example above, the rounding

> would be based on ``policy_params["ges_renten_vers"]["rounding"]["grundr_zuschlag_m"]``.

Reviewer: Describe what happens if we specify only one but not the other.

- Specify in yaml but forget the decorator
- Specify decorator but forget in yaml
- If one thing has no consequences in terms of errors (probably the case for the first), specify a strategy for writing tests so as to minimize the chances of wrong assumptions regarding the behavior.

Note that GETTSIM only allows for optional rounding of functions' results. In case you
happened to write a function that requires an intermediate variable to be rounded, split
it up and create a new function returning exactly the potentially rounded value.

User-written functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For self-written functions, the user needs to add the rounding parameters to
``policy_params`` and decorate the respective functions with ``add_rounding_spec`` in

> the same way as demonstrated above.

Reviewer: Add an actual example here and walk through it, just like above.

:ref:`gep-3`, the following indexing of the ``policy_params`` dictionary

.. code-block:: python

    policy_params["ges_rentenv"]["rounding"]["höchstwert_grundr_zuschlag_m"]

needs to be possible and yield the ``"base"`` and ``"direction"`` keys as
described above.

Note that GETTSIM only allows for optional rounding of functions' results. In
case one is tempted to write a function requiring an intermediate variable to be
rounded, the function should be split up so that another function returns the
quantity to be rounded.

Error handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In case a function has a ``__rounding_params_key__``, but the respective parameters are
missing in ``policy_params``, an error is raised.

Note that if the results have to be rounded in some years, but not in others (e.g.
after a policy reform) the rounding parameters (both ``"base"`` and ``"direction"``)
can be set to ``None``. This allows that the rounding parameters are found and no error
is raised, but still no rounding is applied.

In case rounding parameters are specified and the function does not have
``__rounding_params_key__`` attribute of the functions is missing does not

> lead to an error during execution. This will never happen in the GETTSIM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lead to an error. This will never happen in the GETTSIM
```

codebase, however, due to a suitable test.

User-specified rounding
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If a user wants to change rounding of a specified function, she needs to adjust the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a user wants to change rounding of a specified function, she will need to adjust the
```

rounding parameters in ``policy_params``.

Suppose one would like to specify a reform in which
``höchstwert_grundr_zuschlag_m`` is rounded to the next-lowest fourth decimal

> point instead of to the nearest. In that case, the rounding parameters net to changed as follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
point instead of to the nearest. In that case, the rounding parameters will need to be changed as follows
```

.. code-block:: python

       policy_params["ges_rentenv"]["rounding"]["höchstwert_grundr_zuschlag_m"][
           "direction"
       ] = "down"

> If a user would like to add user-written functions which should be rounded, she needed

Author: We could outline this also in more detail, but I don't think it is necessary.

> If a user would like to add user-written functions which should be rounded, she needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a user would like to add user-written functions which should be rounded, she will need
```

The specification of the rounding parameters starts with the key ``rounding`` at
the outermost level of indentation. The keys are names of functions.

At the next level, the ``YYYY-MM-DD`` key(s) indicate when rounding was
introduced and/or changed. This is done in in the same way as for other policy
parameters, see in :ref:`gep-3`. Those ``YYYY-MM-DD`` key(s) are
associated with a dictionary containing the following elements:

- The parameter ``base`` determines the base to which the variables is rounded.
  It has to be a floating point number.
- The parameter ``direction`` has to be one of ``up``, ``down``, or ``nearest``.
- The ``reference`` must contain the reference to the law, which specifies the
  rounding.

In the same way as other policy parameters, the rounding parameters become part
of the dictionary ``policy_params``.

A function to be rounded must be decorated with ``add_rounding_spec``. This decorator
indicates that the output should potentially be rounded. ``add_rounding_spec`` takes
one required argument: ``params_key`` points to the key of the policy parameters
dictionary containing the rounding parameters relating to the function that is

> decorated. In the above example, the rounding specification for

Reviewer 2: Just for clarification: Is the 'key of the policy parameters dictionary' identical to the name of the `yaml` file?

.. _gep-5:

=============================================
GEP 5 — Optional Rounding of Variables
=============================================

+------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Author     | `Christian Zimpelmann <https://github.com/ChristianZimpelmann>`_ |
+            +------------------------------------------------------------------+

> |            | `Janos Gabler <https://github.com/janosg>`_                      |

Author: @hmgaudecker, would you also like to be added?

Reviewer: No, I just added annoying comments, few constructive stuff!

- The parameter ``base`` determines the base to which the variables is rounded.
  It has to be a floating point number.
- The parameter ``direction`` has to be one of ``up``, ``down``, or ``nearest``.
- The reference must contain the reference to the law, which specifies the
  rounding.

In the same way as other policy parameters, the rounding parameters become part
of the dictionary ``policy_params``.

A function to be rounded must be decorated with ``add_rounding_spec``. This
decorator indicates that the output should be potentially rounded.
``add_rounding_spec`` takes one required argument ``func_arg``, which specifies
the (parameters) argument to the function containing the rounding as a string.
In the above example, the rounding specification
``höchstwert_grundr_zuschlag_m`` will be found in its argument
``ges_rentenv_params``, Hence the ``func_arg`` argument to ``add_rounding_spec``
has to be ``"ges_rentenv_params"``:

.. code-block:: python

    @add_rounding_spec(func_arg="ges_rentenv_params")
    def höchstwert_grundr_zuschlag_m(
        grundrentenzeiten: IntSeries, ges_rentenv_params: dict
    ) -> FloatSeries:
        ...
        return out

> The decorator adds the attribute ``__rounding_arg__`` to the function. When

Author: Great change to use the name of the parameter dict instead of the file!

But can you explain the rational behind the name func_arg? Why is it different than the attribute later?

Reviewer: My thinking was 
- `func_arg` as an argument to the decorator to make clear the name has to come from the function, `arg` is just too generic.
- for `__rounding_arg__`, I thought it was clearer without the `func`. I changed that from `__rounding_parameter_file__`, but it probably should have been `__rounding_spec__` in the first place? That is, it will contain base/direction, as in the (otherwise outdated) implementation in #316?

Author: > func_arg as an argument to the decorator to make clear the name has to come from the function

I don't understand. To my understanding, the name comes from the name of the parameter dictionary.

> That is, it will contain base/direction, as in the (otherwise outdated) implementation in implement decorator for rounding. #316?

No, I won't contain the parameters as those needed to be read (including the correct date) from the parameter file when the function is read.

Author: So I would prefer ``__rounding_parameter_file__`` for both the attribute name and the argument of the decorator.

Reviewer: > No, I won't contain the parameters as those needed to be read (including the correct date) from the parameter file when the function is read.

I do not understand this sentence.

Reviewer: > So I would prefer `__rounding_parameter_file__` for both the attribute name and the argument of the decorator.

My point is that with what I am suggesting, you only need to look at this code snippet to understand what is going on.

```python
    @add_rounding_spec(func_arg="ges_rentenv_params")
    def höchstwert_grundr_zuschlag_m(
        grundrentenzeiten: IntSeries, ges_rentenv_params: dict
    )
    pass
```

The rounding specification will be in the dictionary `ges_rentenv_params`, which is an argument to the function. The fact that it comes from some parameters file is irrelevant at this point and downward misleading for user-provided functions / ex post changes to the parameters dictionary.

calling ``compute_taxes_and_transfers`` with ``rounding=True``, GETTSIM will
look for a key ``rounding`` in ``func_arg`` (here: ``ges_rentenv_params``) and
within that, for another key containing the decorated function's name (here:
``höchstwert_grundr_zuschlag_m``). That is, by the machinery outlined in
:ref:`gep-3`, the following indexing of the ``policy_params`` dictionary

.. code-block:: python

    policy_params["ges_rentenv"]["rounding"]["höchstwert_grundr_zuschlag_m"]

needs to be possible and yield the ``"base"`` and ``"direction"`` keys as
described above.

Note that GETTSIM only allows for optional rounding of functions' results. In
case one is tempted to write a function requiring an intermediate variable to be
rounded, the function should be split up so that another function returns the
quantity to be rounded.

Error handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In case a function has a ``__rounding_arg__``, but the respective

> parameters are missing in ``policy_params``, an error is raised.

Author: I just realized that this would also happen if rounding of a variable would change over time such that the variable isn't rounded at some point in time. For this time period, rounding parameters would be missing.

I would hence suggest that we also just test that all decorated functions have rounding parameters specified (for at least one point in time), but don't raise an error.

Reviewer: This might be a case where I would it is better to require explicit setting of rounding to `None` or the like in the parameters file for periods where it does not exist. If I see the `rounding_spec` decorator, I expect it to take effect and do not want to hide required action at a distance.

That is, for the GETTSIM codebase, it is no big deal either way, I am thinking more about user-provided changes here where I would want to see errors.

Author: We could allow for ``direction = None``

Reviewer: direction / base or both should be `None`, I'd say.

Author: I added a short paragraph about that.
